In 1962, First National has provided local decision-making and accessibility, as well as banking products and services to Brazos Valley citizens.
First National Bank.
First, always.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
We have had the honor to feature veterans who have served in as many as three wars, but today we are honored to meet Albert Novak, Jr., who served his country in uniform for some 33 years in the Navy, in the Army,
and in the Air Force.
That's right, three branches of service as a machinist aboard the USS Wasp for two years during World War II.
Albert Novak recalls the day, March of 1945, when a 500-pound bomb hit the Wasp.
He was one of 150 injured, fortunately not one of the 100 who died that day.
Born and raised in Bryan, Texas, it's our honor to welcome Albert Novak Jr.
to Veterans of the Valley.
Albert, it is an honor to have you here.
It really is.
You served in the Navy and then the Army and then the Air Force.
We're going to talk about that later.
But talk about growing up in Bryan.
You were born and raised here.
You went to Stephen F. Austin and then eventually you enlisted in the Navy.
Sort of talk about the early days here in Bryan.
Well, I started out, I knew most of the people in Bryan because I delivered papers out of Houston papers, Dallas, Waco papers, and delivered to Bryan Eagle.
And then in addition to that, I used to be the Western Union messenger, rode a bicycle, delivered, delivered, and message.
So I knew pretty well most of the people in Bryan because the population was about
6,000 at that time, so I didn't know them personally.
I knew of them or I knew most of them.
Right, because you delivered their paper or their Western Union telegram, so you didn't know.
You were Stephen F. Austin, class of 1942, and then soon after you graduated from high school, you decided to join up.
I went directly into
into the Navy after I got out.
And I went to the Navy on the 8th of September 1942.
And they sent me, I enlisted in Houston.
They sent me to San Diego for boot camp.
And then from there I went on to St.
Paul, Minneapolis, Minnesota to what you call a machinist-made school.
One of the reasons you told me the Navy was attractive to you because you had heard that you got three meals a day, you got a nice place to sleep, and you got to move around a while.
Well, I did get stuck in one place, like I said, and I had a clean bed to sleep in.
I had a hot meal.
Well, except in the combat, otherwise I had a hot meal.
Well, and another thing, my friends,
Most of my friends joined the Navy and they told me about it.
And I was interested in history and geography.
Yes, sir.
And I figured I'd see these places that are studied about, which I did see a lot of them that I studied about.
Right, right.
You attended the University of Minnesota in St.
Paul and talk about those 16 weeks.
Well, in the 16 weeks I became an arc welder, an acetylene welder, a refrigeration mechanic, a diesel mechanic, an automotive mechanic.
What I did is
I found out what they were, actually.
Right.
But I ended up in the heat gang when I went aboard the ship.
But you learned a little bit of everything in those 16 weeks.
Oh, yeah, in those 16 weeks.
They broke in.
I mean, to give you a little common sense.
Right, right.
And it served you well later on.
You eventually went to Norfolk, Virginia, where you were...
You were in a seaplane flying cargo.
Talk about that.
I went aboard a seaplane tender, but mostly what we did, we hauled cargo all the way from Bermuda down to Puerto Rico, Cuba, Panama, and Brazil.
And I stayed on this for six months, and then I transferred to Boston waiting for the ship to be commissioned.
Right, right.
The ship we're talking about, the aircraft carrier, the USS Wasp, CV-18.
Right.
And I've learned so much about the Wasp here just a couple of days here since we first visited.
You can see an awful lot about it on the internet.
They've got a great website about the Wasp.
You were on that carrier for two years, from November of 43 to December of 1945.
Yeah.
Talk about it from the time you left Boston all the way around to Hawaii and then into the Pacific.
Well, when we were commissioned, we went down to Trinidad and all through the Caribbean, what you call the shakedown cruise.
Yes, sir.
That's to get all the nuts and bolts worked out.
If it didn't work, then they repaired it.
So after we went on the shakedown cruise,
We went through the Panama Canal, went through Hawaii, and then we went on all the way.
I went all the way from the Admiralty Islands to Japan, including four boats of which is now Taiwan.
Right.
And I covered the whole Pacific.
Also, I think we did 275,000 miles.
Wow.
In those two years, and those were the two busiest years for the USS Wasp in World War II, when the times that you were on it from 43 to 45.
Eight battles in the Pacific that you were involved in.
Eight battles I participated in.
I don't remember all the names because the islands, some of the like, there was Iwo, well, I was at Iwo Jima.
Right.
I was aboard the ship.
Palau, and I don't know.
Well, as a matter of fact, I'll tell you, because of the miracle of the internet, I do know the eight battles that the WASP was involved in while you were there from 43 to 45.
The Western New Guinea operation, the Marianas operation,
including there, you included the Battle of the Philippine Sea, Palau, like you talked about, the Western Carolina Island Operation, the Leyte Operation.
In the Leyte Gulf, that was the Okinawa attack in October of 44.
Also, the Luzon Operation was what you were involved in, the Iwo Jima Operation, the Okinawa Gunto Operation, and the Japan Operation, eight battles that the WASP was involved in
What do you remember, without being specific to any one battle, but what do you remember about these times in your job and what was involved?
Obviously, the flight deck was pretty busy all of this time.
Well, the flight deck, I was on a damage control crew.
I was below deck, so I didn't see too much of a flight deck.
And I was below deck most, just not all the time.
Right.
Talk about your specific job, because it was quite a necessary job.
You kept the water hot.
Well, like I said, I had a heating system, and I went all the way from the bilge all the way up to the top of the stack.
I had to take care of the whistle and took care of the heating system.
But for the galley, which we call a galley, it's a kitchen actually, where the food was cooked.
And they had to take care of, see that hot water got to the showers, and then they had to heat the ship.
Right.
So that was your job.
So if they had a cold shower, it was your fault, right?
Yeah.
And if they didn't have hot water for cooking,
But I was one of the few people that went from stem, cistern, and from the bottom to the top.
So if the water wasn't hot, they called for machinist second class Novak to see what was going on.
Is that right?
March the 19th, 1945.
What do you remember about that?
Well, I was secured from general quarters.
And every time we secured from vital parts,
The Chowhound, they started running down and down in the mess hall.
So there was a Japanese plane slipped into the landing pattern and he dropped a 500 pound bomb which went through about seven decks and it exploded in the laundry underneath the galley.
That's what killed a hundred men right there and wounded about another 150, 160.
And I was
I was lucky because I was in the passageway and the concussion threw me about 20 feet
into what we call a bulkhead, the wall.
And I was in a coma for about, oh, about four days back in sickbay.
So I didn't know much that went on there.
And when I got out, I smelled human flesh burning.
That's bad.
Yes, sir.
That's...
And it stayed, it lingered, it lingered there for about maybe a month before it finally disintegrated.
It's been more than 60 years, but there are some things that you'll never, ever forget, right?
That's right.
And you were injured.
What were your injuries exactly?
Well, I got a cut and a burn on my back.
And, well, a concussion, I didn't get nothing out of it.
Right, right.
But you earned your Purple Heart because of that on March the 19th, 1945.
Yeah.
And 100 men were killed that day.
It happened around the time that they were lining up for chow, right?
Yeah, yeah.
It was about early in the morning, about 7 in the morning.
One of your shipmates, you had many shipmates, was named Ross Jolly.
And on the website, he wrote a narrative about...
the time on the USS Wasp.
And I wanted to read what he wrote about this.
Many terrifying experiences occurred.
Japanese airplane attacks, the roar and flash of blazing guns, and the black of night made our hearts pound with fear.
We were especially fearful of the kamikaze attacks
The desperate Japanese would dive their explosive-laden planes headlong onto American ships.
Many kamikaze attempts were made on the USS Wasp, but all were shot down in the ocean.
And talk about that day in March of 45.
Seaman Jolly writes, during an enemy attack in March of 45, an armor-piercing delayed action bomb pierced the flight deck amid ships.
It burrowed downward through seven steel decks exploding deep in the ship's innards.
The galley was destroyed and the lives of more than a hundred of our shipmates were taken.
So he writes just as you describe it.
It was certainly a memorable experience.
I never, never, never.
We had it.
That ship had about 2,500 people on it, so you didn't get to know too many of them.
Most of the time, people stayed within their bailiwick.
Right, right.
Your ship was called the Mighty Stinger.
That was the nickname for the carrier, right?
USS Wasp is quite a famous...
And as a matter of fact, later, after your service in World War II had finished, it became an attack carrier.
And as a matter of fact, it became famous also in the space missions, in the Apollo missions.
Yes.
Well, before II, in 1945, we converted into a troop ship.
I made a trip to Italy, and we picked up about 5,000 troops there.
Right.
And after I got off, I think they made two trips to England.
And they lost about 30 feet of the flight deck in the storm.
We'd lost 30 feet once before.
We had to go back to the States, hit a typhoon, and it flattened about 30 feet of the flight deck.
So after it became a...
A troop carrier, it did the same thing when it went to England.
They said about a 90-foot wave hit it.
And imagine when a wave is 90 feet.
They had quad 40 millimeter
machine guns on that it just it just mashed in as though they were paper.
Exactly, exactly.
We have some photographs that that you have in your home that you supplied for us a few photographs and plus some photographs of the wasp that I was able to find on the internet also and I want to go ahead and go to those and we'll take a look at them and you can sort of look at what we are we're going to be looking at here.
This is a picture of a young Albert Novak.
About when was this taken do you believe?
When do you think that picture was taken?
You see it right there on the screen?
When was it taken?
Yeah, about when?
Well, let's see.
About how old were you?
April of 45.
About April of 45.
Yeah, because we pulled into Bremerton, Washington the day that...
I believe it was President Roosevelt that died.
Right.
And so we pulled in, so everybody got leave.
So it was in April of 1945.
Okay.
Let's move on.
There you are.
Where was that picture taken?
That was in the Army in Korea.
I see.
Because later, when you were in the Army, after the Korean War, you did serve some time there.
Okay.
Let's move on to the next one.
Talk about this picture.
You're the one in the white t-shirt, I believe, the fourth from the front.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, see, when they went around me, I had to go through a basic training.
That was Fort Riley, Kansas.
And in the company, everybody was an ex-swabby.
From the commander, company commander on down, there's nothing but ex-sailors in the outfit.
And there you are.
Good-looking young soldier there.
Here's a picture of the CV-18, the USS Wasp, a good color picture of the Wasp at sea so people can get an idea of what this particular carrier looked like.
Got a lot of aircraft on that flight deck.
I think they carried something like 75 ready aircraft.
Yes, sir.
Fighters.
And here's another picture of CB-18 from the front.
You can see with the wings up.
Quite an impressive craft at sea.
Now these machine guns are one that I told you that are flattened out that was on the front of it.
Yes, sir.
There's another shot.
Okay, now this is made later because we didn't have a cannon deck at that time.
I see.
So this is after it had become converted to an attack carrier.
Yeah.
Right.
Okay.
Now, this photograph is amazing to me.
I've got some notes on it, as a matter of fact.
You didn't even know about this photograph.
That's the wasp right there in the foreground.
And in that one picture, if you go from the carrier in the front and move backwards, the next carrier is the Yorktown, and behind it is the Hornet, the USS Hancock behind it, the Ticonderoga,
And in the row behind, all the way back, is the USS Lexington.
And this really is the epitome of the U.S.
Navy's offensive power in World War II in one photograph.
Yeah, I've never seen that.
Pretty incredible photograph with all those carriers in one shot.
Yeah.
Okay, I want to move on.
This is a little bit later picture.
You're a little bit older in this one.
Where was this taken?
That's before I went in.
I was in high school when that picture was taken.
Oh, is that right?
I would have thought that was a little bit older picture, but what a smile.
What a smile on your face.
Some of these people, they think I was born old.
They don't remember you when they thought you were born old.
When I talk to some of these people, some of these kids, I say, I wasn't born at this age.
I was your age at one time.
That's right.
I was young and foolish at one time, just like you.
Good looking there.
This is Frances.
Frances Catalina.
Catalina.
Yeah.
And she is your dear friend these days.
And you were married for, I believe, some 65 years to Olita.
And you lost her in 1999.
Yeah, my wife died.
Well, her husband died in 1999.
My wife died in August, and I believe her husband died in June.
Right.
Wanted to include this picture because she's a very, very close friend, and you all mean a lot to each other, and I know, and you all go out and party and listen to music and
And have a good time.
These young kids figure that old folks don't party to.
I mean, lots of them were surprised to see that we were going, Sons of Herman and Caldwell, LaGrange, where they got music.
Right.
And they just can't, they figure once you get old, you get in the rocking chair and you sit there and you wait.
Right, right.
After you finished your Navy duty, you came back home, you worked in various jobs, you worked for a furniture company, you worked for a lumber company for Marion Pugh for a while, but then you decided to
You couldn't find another job.
I couldn't find a job.
You couldn't find work, so you decided to join the Army in 1953, is that right?
I went in the Army in February of 1950.
50, yes, yeah.
And I was stationed in Fort Knox, Kentucky, at Fort Sam.
But I ended up in the Army as a recruiting station.
But I was drafting the people.
I was doing the process and all the paperwork so we could draft them.
And that was in Albuquerque you were doing that, right?
Yeah, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
That's right.
And you were working, that was hard work.
You were working some 18 hours a day.
Yeah, yeah, because I couldn't get any help.
Right, you were driving the bus, you were doing whatever it took.
And then when it came time to get out or re-enlist,
They said that anybody being enlisted who goes to Korea is a rifleman.
On the ground.
Yeah, and I figured at 32, 33 years old, that's two old to start carrying a rifle.
So I got out and I come to Bryan Air Force Base and enlisted as Bryan Air Force Base.
So you were in the Air Force now.
Yeah.
So from the Navy to the Army to the Air Force in 1953, you were at Bryan Air Force Base.
And you eventually did go to Korea as an airman.
I went to Korea, but this was in 1955, so it was all over.
And then there was a span of these tours of some four to four and a half years.
I know you were in Amarillo for a while.
I was in Amarillo.
I was stationed at Texas A&M with the ROTC for four and a half years.
Right.
What did you do there?
You worked here on campus at Texas A&M.
Well, they called the Trigon.
I think it's still there.
And I typed up the paperwork for the commissioning.
For when officers were commissioned out of Texas A&M.
You would do that paperwork.
I did the paperwork.
Eventually to Elmendorf in Alaska.
And you liked Alaska, right?
Yes, yes.
Well, from A&M, I went to Elmenor, if I stayed there four and a half years, come down the Alcan.
We took 16 days.
We had friends that were traveling, so we took about 16 days to get from Anchorage till we crossed the border of the United States.
Right.
And then I went up to Kinslow, Michigan.
I was sweating.
Fargo, North Dakota.
It is cold up there.
But I come to find out, I think it's colder in Kensalow, Michigan, because that wind comes off of Lake Superior.
If you shovel your way out in the morning to go to work, if you come in at noon, you shovel your way in, and when you eat, you're shoveling again.
You're shoveling that same snow all the time.
So you were pushing papers in Kincheloe Air Force Base.
I was pushing papers.
I was in personnel.
You wanted to go back to Alaska to retire.
I wanted to go back to Alaska, but like I say, at that time, my retired pay was $635 a month, and that would have paid the rent, and that's about it.
Right.
And it wasn't easy to find a job up there either.
But for me, if I'm...
When I went to Kensalo, I went to McCarty Air Force Base.
It was in Tacoma, Washington.
Tacoma, Washington.
And that's where I retired.
That's where you were discharged.
Incidentally, Kensalo, they turned that into a state president.
Oh, is that right?
Well, you got out just in time.
That's good.
But you were discharged finally from the Air Force.
Your third discharge after being discharged from the Navy, the Army, and then the Air Force.
And discharged in 1974.
And all in all, from the beginning to the end, 33 years of service.
Well, see, I consider myself retired from the Navy, the Army, and the Air Force.
Correct.
People say, you can't.
But I'm serving all those, I'll figure it out.
And then after I retired, I came back to Bryan.
And first of all, the VA kept asking me this.
Go to school, go to school.
I said, why?
At my age, I was 52 years old.
He said, because we'll give you $450 a month.
So I went to Glenn.
I graduated from Glenn.
Yes, sir.
But while I was going, I was doing maintenance for Albertson.
I did that for about 22 years.
Wow.
It was minor maintenance.
No major...
Plumbing, no major electricity, no air conditioning.
And now, I'd like to say, I had a bypass in 1996.
Yes, sir.
And I started slowing down and slowing down.
And I finally got to the point where when I had to fix something, I had to sit down.
I figured it was time to quit.
Yes, sir.
You have a family I know that's very proud of you.
You have three daughters and three grandchildren and one great grandchild, right?
Yes.
And you're very close to them.
I know your three daughters all live here, right?
Albert, you fought in eight battles in World War II.
You were involved in eight battles on the USS Wasp in World War II.
You saw a share of hardship, obviously.
Right now, you're fighting another battle.
Right now.
You have cancer.
Talk about that.
I know you don't have a problem talking about that.
I don't know.
I had a bellyache.
I was going to a doctor, and I asked him who it is.
He said, I don't know.
So baseball season was opening.
The Brian Bomber was opening.
So Francis and I were going to go to the ball camp.
But about a quarter to six, I got a chill.
Yes, sir.
And I'd had pneumonia about four times.
So I thought, well, if you get pneumonia, so I go on emergency.
That's when they found the cancer.
Yes, sir.
I mean, they put me in the hospital, and they put me on the... He did a CAT scan, and they said it's pancreatic and liver cancer, which is terminal.
But you're not afraid.
You're not afraid.
That's what you told me.
You're... I gotta go.
I gotta go sometime.
Yes, sir.
And, like I say, I...
When I was a kid, I never figured I'd get 85.
85.
So I just only had my share.
Yes, sir.
A wonderful and a very proud life.
And we wish you the best.
And we thank you very, very much for your service.
And we know that your family loves you and you're loved by everybody who loves America.
And thank you for defending our country and for serving our country.
Thank you.
We're out of time, but thank you again for your service.
He wore the uniform of a sailor, a soldier, and an airman, and gave his most vital years to the service of his country.
As he endured those eight Pacific War battles more than 60 years ago, Albert Novak Jr.
courageously fights another battle today, and we salute him, and we wish him his victory.
I'm Tom Turbyville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
Just look at that camera right there with me, okay.
Are we ready?
Okay.
After serving his country in World War II's Pacific campaign aboard the USS Wasp, Navy machinist Albert Novak Jr.
had more service to give, so he did, in the U.S.
Army and finally in the U.S.
Air Force.
A Purple Heart recipient who was born and raised in Bryan, his more than three decades of military service, the battles he endured then and the one he endures today are true inspirations.
I'm Tom Turberville.
Join Albert Novak Jr.
and me on Veterans of the Valley, Friday at 8.30, Saturday and Sunday at 6.30, right here on KAMU-TV.
We'll be going.
Okay.
After serving his country in World War II's Pacific campaign on the USS Wasp, Navy machinist Albert Novak Jr.
had more service to give.
So he did in the Army and the Air Force.
A Purple Heart recipient who was born and raised in Bryan, more than three decades of military service, the battles he endured then and the one he endures today are true inspirations.
Hi, join me, Tom Turbeville, and Albert Novak on Veterans of the Valley, Friday at 8.30, Saturday and Sunday at 6.30, right here on KAMU-TV.
He served his country in World War II's Pacific... You don't have to redo it.
He served his country in World War II's Pacific campaign aboard the USS Wasp, a Navy machinist.
Albert Novak Jr.
had given more service... Here we go.
Okay, here we go.
Three, two.
Wait, wait, wait.
Okay.
Okay, they're ready now.
He served his country in World Wars II's Pacific... Here we go.
He served his country in World War II's Pacific campaign aboard the USS Wasp.
Albert Novak Jr.
had more service to give, so he did, in the Army and the Air Force.
A Purple Heart recipient who was born and raised in Bryan.
More than three decades of military service, the battles he endured then and the one he endures today are true inspirations.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Join Albert Novak on Veterans of the Valley, Friday at 8.30, Saturday and Sunday at 6.30, right here on KAMU.